=head1 NAME

Conformal3Proj -- conformal projections for a triaxial ellipsoid

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<Conformal3Proj> [ B<-r> ]
[ B<-t> I<a> I<b> I<c> | B<-e> I<b> I<e2> I<k2> I<kp2> ]
[ B<-tx> I<ax> I<bx> I<cx> | B<-ex> I<bx> I<e2x> I<k2x> I<kp2x> ]
[ B<-d> | B<-:> ] [ B<-w> ] [ B<-p> I<prec> ]
[ B<--comment-delimiter> I<commentdelim> ]
[ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]
[ B<--input-file> I<infile> | B<--input-string> I<instring> ]
[ B<--line-separator> I<linesep> ]
[ B<--output-file> I<outfile> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Project points using the Jacobi conformal projection.  By default, the
coordinates of points on a triaxial ellipsoid are read from standard
input as ellipsoidal latitude and longitude and the projected points are
written to standard output as easting and northing.  The scale of the
projection is appended to the output.  Specifying B<-r> causes the
reverse projection to be performed.

If either B<-tx> or B<-ex> is given, then this describes a target
ellipsoid onto which the points are conformally mapped via the Jacobi
projections to intermediate spheres.  In this case, the meridian
convergence and the scale are appended to the output.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-r>

perform the reverse projection.

=item B<-t> I<a> I<b> I<c>

specify the ellipsoid via its major semiaxis I<a>, median semiaxis I<b>,
and minor semixis I<c>.  By default, we have I<a> = 6378172 m, I<b> =
6378102 m, I<c> = 6356752 m, an approximate triaxial model of the earth.
(With this model I<omg> = 0deg, corresponds to I<lon> = -14.93deg.

=item B<-e> I<b> I<e2> I<k2> I<kp2>

specify the ellipsoid via the median semiaxis, I<b> and the shape
parameters I<e2> = (I<a>^2 - I<c>^2)/I<b>^2, I<k2> = (I<b>^2 -
I<c>^2)/(I<a>^2 - I<c>^2), and I<kp2> = (I<a>^2 - I<b>^2)/(I<a>^2 -
I<c>^2).  Simple fractions are allowed for I<e2>, I<k2>, and I<kp2>.
Internally, the supplied values of I<k2> and I<kp2> are normalized so
that I<k2> + I<kp2> = 1.

=item B<-tx> I<ax> I<bx> I<cx>

specify the target ellipsoid via its semiaxes.

=item B<-ex> I<bx> I<e2x> I<k2x> I<kp2x>

specify the target ellipsoid via its median semiaxes and shape
parameters.

=item B<-d>

output angles as degrees, minutes, seconds instead of decimal degrees.

=item B<-:>

like B<-d>, except use : as a separator instead of the d, ', and "
delimiters.

=item B<-w>

toggle the longitude first flag (it starts off); if the flag is on, then
on input and output, longitude precedes latitude (except that, on input,
this can be overridden by a hemisphere designator, I<N>, I<S>, I<E>,
I<W>).

=item B<-p> I<prec>

set the output precision to I<prec> (default 3).  For distances, I<prec>
is the number of digits after the decimal point for ellipsoids which are
approximately the same size as the Earth; for other ellipsoids the
precision is adjusted to retain the same relative precision.  For
latitudes and longitudes (in degrees), the number of digits after the
decimal point is I<prec> + 5.  For the scale, the precision is I<prec> +
7.

=item B<--comment-delimiter> I<commentdelim>

set the comment delimiter to I<commentdelim> (e.g., "#" or "//").  If
set, the input lines will be scanned for this delimiter and, if found,
the delimiter and the rest of the line will be removed prior to
processing and subsequently appended to the output line (separated by a
space).

=item B<--version>

print version and exit.

=item B<-h>

print usage and exit.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation and exit.

=item B<--input-file> I<infile>

read input from the file I<infile> instead of from standard input; a file
name of "-" stands for standard input.

=item B<--input-string> I<instring>

read input from the string I<instring> instead of from standard input.
All occurrences of the line separator character (default is a semicolon)
in I<instring> are converted to newlines before the reading begins.

=item B<--line-separator> I<linesep>

set the line separator character to I<linesep>.  By default this is a
semicolon.

=item B<--output-file> I<outfile>

write output to the file I<outfile> instead of to standard output; a
file name of "-" stands for standard output.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

   echo 33.3 44.4 | Conformal3Proj
   -5077732.396 3922571.859 1.1970343759
   echo -5077732.396 3922571.859 | Conformal3Proj -r
   33.30000000 44.40000000 1.1970343759

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<Conformal3Proj> to return an exit
code of 1.  However, an error does not cause B<Conformal3Proj> to
terminate; following lines will be converted.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Ellipsoidal coordinates are documented in Section 2 of C. F. F. Karney,
I<Jacobi's solution for geodesics on a triaxial ellipsoid>,
Technical Report, SRI International, Nov. 2025,
L<https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.nnnnn>.

The Wikipedia page, Geodesics on an ellipsoid,
L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geodesics_on_an_ellipsoid>.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<Conformal3Proj> was written by Charles Karney.

=head1 HISTORY

B<Conformal3Proj> was added to GeographicLib,
L<https://geographiclib.sourceforge.io>, in version 2.6.
