=head1 NAME

Geod3Solve -- perform geodesic calculations on a triaxial ellipsoid

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<Geod3Solve>
[ B<-i> | B<-L> I<bet1> I<omg1> I<alp1> ]
[ B<-t> I<a> I<b> I<c> | B<-e> I<b> I<e2> I<k2> I<kp2> |
B<-e2> I<b> I<f> ]
[ B<-u> ]
[ B<-d> | B<-:> ] [ B<-w> ] [ B<-f> ] [ B<-p> I<prec> ]
[ B<--comment-delimiter> I<commentdelim> ]
[ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]
[ B<--input-file> I<infile> | B<--input-string> I<instring> ]
[ B<--line-separator> I<linesep> ]
[ B<--output-file> I<outfile> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The shortest path between two points on a triaxial ellipsoid at
(I<bet1>, I<omg1>) and (I<bet2>, I<omg2>) is called the geodesic.  Its
length is I<s12> and the geodesic from point 1 to point 2 has forward
azimuths I<alp1> and I<alp2> at the two end points.  Here I<bet> and
I<omg> denote the ellipsoidal latitude, I<beta>, and longitude,
I<omega>; I<alp> is an abbreviation of I<alpha>

B<Geod3Solve> operates in one of three modes:

=over

=item 1.

By default, B<Geod3Solve> accepts lines on the standard input containing
I<bet1> I<omg1> I<alp1> I<s12> and prints I<bet2> I<omg2> I<alp2>
on standard output.  This is the direct geodesic calculation.

=item 2.

With the B<-i> option, B<Geod3Solve> performs the inverse geodesic
calculation.  It reads lines containing I<bet1> I<omg1> I<bet2>
I<omg2> and prints the corresponding values of I<alp1> I<alp2> I<s12>.

=item 3.

Command line arguments B<-L> I<bet1> I<omg1> I<alp1> specify a geodesic
line.  B<Geod3Solve> then accepts a sequence of I<s12> values (one per
line) on standard input and prints I<bet2> I<omg2> I<alp2> for each.
This generates a sequence of points on a single geodesic.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-i>

perform an inverse geodesic calculation (see 2 above).

=item B<-L> I<bet1> I<omg1> I<alp1>

line mode (see 3 above); generate a sequence of points along the
geodesic specified by I<bet1> I<omg1> I<alp1>.  The B<-w> flag can be
used to swap the default order of the 2 geographic coordinates, provided
that it appears before B<-L>.

=item B<-t> I<a> I<b> I<c>

specify the ellipsoid via its major semiaxis I<a>, median semiaxis I<b>,
and minor semixis I<c>.  By default, we have I<a> = 6378172 m, I<b> =
6378102 m, I<c> = 6356752 m, an approximate triaxial model of the earth.
(With this model I<omg> = 0deg, corresponds to I<lon> = -14.93deg.

=item B<-e> I<b> I<e2> I<k2> I<kp2>

specify the ellipsoid via the median semiaxis, I<b> and the shape
parameters I<e2> = (I<a>^2 - I<c>^2)/I<b>^2, I<k2> = (I<b>^2 -
I<c>^2)/(I<a>^2 - I<c>^2), and I<kp2> = (I<a>^2 - I<b>^2)/(I<a>^2 -
I<c>^2).  Simple fractions are allowed for I<e2>, I<k2>, and I<kp2>.
Internally, the supplied values of I<k2> and I<kp2> are normalized so
that I<k2> + I<kp2> = 1.

=item B<-e2> I<b> I<f>

specify a biaxial ellipsoid via its equatorial radius I<b> and
flattening I<f>.  A simple fraction, is allowed for I<f>.  In this
mode, latitudes are interpreted as geodetic latitudes on both input
and output.  If I<f> is negative, I<bet> and I<omg> are swapped so
that latitude and longitude have their conventional interpretations
(e.g., longitude measures the angle about the axis of symmetry).

=item B<-u>

unroll the latitude and longitude.  Normally, on output latitudes and
longitudes are reduced to lie in [-90deg,90deg] and [-180deg,180deg)
respectively.  However with this option, the returned longitude
I<bet2> and I<omg2> are "unrolled" so that I<bet2> - I<bet1> and
I<omg2> - I<omg1> indicates how often and in what sense the geodesic
has encircled the ellipsoid.

=item B<-d>

output angles as degrees, minutes, seconds instead of decimal degrees.

=item B<-:>

like B<-d>, except use : as a separator instead of the d, ', and "
delimiters.

=item B<-w>

toggle the longitude first flag (it starts off); if the flag is on, then
on input and output, longitude precedes latitude (except that, on input,
this can be overridden by a hemisphere designator, I<N>, I<S>, I<E>,
I<W>).

=item B<-f>

full output; each line of output consists of 7 quantities: I<bet1>
I<omg1> I<alp1> I<bet2> I<omg2> I<alp2> I<s12>.

=item B<-p> I<prec>

set the output precision to I<prec> (default 3).  For distances, I<prec>
is the number of digits after the decimal point for ellipsoids which are
approximately the same size as the Earth; for other ellipsoids the
precision is adjusted to retain the same relative precision.  For
latitudes and longitudes (in degrees), the number of digits after the
decimal point is I<prec> + 5.  For cartesian directions, the precision is
I<prec> + 7.

=item B<--comment-delimiter> I<commentdelim>

set the comment delimiter to I<commentdelim> (e.g., "#" or "//").  If
set, the input lines will be scanned for this delimiter and, if found,
the delimiter and the rest of the line will be removed prior to
processing and subsequently appended to the output line (separated by a
space).

=item B<--version>

print version and exit.

=item B<-h>

print usage and exit.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation and exit.

=item B<--input-file> I<infile>

read input from the file I<infile> instead of from standard input; a file
name of "-" stands for standard input.

=item B<--input-string> I<instring>

read input from the string I<instring> instead of from standard input.
All occurrences of the line separator character (default is a semicolon)
in I<instring> are converted to newlines before the reading begins.

=item B<--line-separator> I<linesep>

set the line separator character to I<linesep>.  By default this is a
semicolon.

=item B<--output-file> I<outfile>

write output to the file I<outfile> instead of to standard output; a
file name of "-" stands for standard output.

=back

=head1 INPUT

B<Geod3Solve> measures all angles in degrees and all lengths (I<s12>)
in meters.  On input angles (latitude, longitude, azimuth)
can be as decimal degrees or degrees, minutes, seconds.  For example,
C<40d30>, C<40d30'>, C<40:30>, C<40.5d>, and C<40.5> are all
equivalent.  By default, latitude precedes longitude for each point
(the B<-w> flag switches this convention); however on input either may
be given first by appending (or prepending) I<N> or I<S> to the
latitude and I<E> or I<W> to the longitude.  Azimuths are measured
clockwise from north; however this may be overridden with I<E> or
I<W>.

For details on the allowed formats for angles, see the C<GEOGRAPHIC
COORDINATES> section of GeoConvert(1).

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<Geod3Solve> to return an exit code
of 1.  However, an error does not cause B<Geod3Solve> to terminate;
following lines will be converted.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Route from JFK Airport to Singapore Changi Airport on a triaxial
ellipsoid:

  echo 40:38:23N 073:46:44W-19.43W X 01:21:33N 103:59:22E-19.43W |
    tr X '\n' |
    tools/Cart3Convert -G | tools/Cart3Convert -E -r | tr '\n' ' ' |
    tools/Geod3Solve -i -: -p 0
  => 003:15:05.9 177:27:09.0 15339505

The steps here are shift for longitude of major axis (-19.43d), convert
to geocentric for biaxial Earth, convert to ellipsoidal for triaxial
Earth, compute geodesic distance.

=head1 SEE ALSO

Cart3Convert(1).

The algorithms are described in C. F. F. Karney,
I<Jacobi's solution for geodesics on a triaxial ellipsoid>,
Technical Report, SRI International, Nov. 2025,
L<https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.01621>.

The Wikipedia page, Geodesics on an ellipsoid,
L<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geodesics_on_an_ellipsoid>.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<Geod3Solve> was written by Charles Karney.

=head1 HISTORY

B<Geod3Solve> was added to GeographicLib,
L<https://geographiclib.sourceforge.io>, in version 2.6.
