=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

MagneticEval -- look up magnetic heights

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<MagneticEval> [ B<-n> I<name> ] [ B<-d> I<dir> ] [ B<-l> ]
[ B<-a> | B<-c> I<south> I<west> I<north> I<east> ]
[ B<-z> I<zone> ] [ B<--msltohae> ] [ B<--haetomsl> ]
[ B<-v> ] [ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]
[ B<--input-file> I<infile> | B<--input-string> I<instring> ]
[ B<--output-file> I<outfile> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<MagneticEval> in positions on standard input and print out the
corresponding magnetic heights on standard output.  Also print the
northerly and easterly gradients of the magnetic height (i.e., the rate at
which the magnetic height changes per unit distance along the WGS84
ellipsoid in the specified directions).

Positions are given as latitude and longitude, UTM/UPS, or MGRS, in any
of the formats accepted by GeoConvert(1).  (MGRS coordinates signify the
I<center> of the corresponing MGRS square.)  If the B<-z> option is
specified then the specified zone is prepended to each line of input
(which must be in UTM/UPS coordinates).  This allows a file with UTM
eastings and northings in a single zone to be used as standard input.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-n>

use magnetic I<name> instead of the default C<egm96-5>.  See
L<MAGNETICS|magnetics>.

=item B<-d>

read magnetic data from I<dir> instead of the default.  See
L<MAGNETICS|magnetics>.

=item B<-l>

use bilinear interpolation instead of cubic.  See
L<INTERPOLATION|interpolation>.

=item B<-a>

cache the entire data set in memory.  See L<CACHE|cache>.

=item B<-c>

cache the data bounded by I<south> I<west> I<north> I<east> in memory.
See L<CACHE|cache>.

=item B<-z>

prefix each line of input by I<zone>, e.g., C<38N>.  This should be used
when the input consists of UTM/UPS eastings and northings.

=item B<--msltohae>

standard input should include a final token on each line which is
treated as a height (in meters) above the magnetic and the output echoes
the input line with the height converted to height above ellipsoid
(HAE).  If B<-z> I<zone> is specified then the I<third> token is treated
as the height; this makes it possible to convert LIDAR data where each
line consists of: easting northing height intensity.

=item B<--haetomsl>

this is similar to B<--msltohae> except that the height token is treated
as a height (in meters) above the ellipsoid and the output echoes the
input line with the height converted to height above the magnetic (MSL).

=item B<-v>

print information about the magnetic on standard error before processing
the input.

=item B<--version>

print version and exit.

=item B<-h>

print usage, the default magnetic path and name, and exit.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation and exit.

=item B<--input-file>

read input from the file I<infile> instead of from standard input; a file
name of "-" stands for standard input.

=item B<--input-string>

read input from the string I<instring> instead of from standard input.
All the semicolons in I<instring> are converted to newlines before the
reading begins.

=item B<--output-file>

write output to the file I<outfile> instead of to standard output; a
file name of "-" stands for standard output.

=back

=head1 MAGNETICS

B<MagneticEval> computes magnetic heights by interpolating on the data in a
regularly spaced table (see L<INTERPOLATION|interpolation>).  The
following magnetic tables are available (however, some may not be
installed):

                                  bilinear error    cubic error
   name         magnetic    grid     max      rms      max      rms
   egm84-30     EGM84    30'      1.546 m  70 mm    0.274 m  14 mm
   egm84-15     EGM84    15'      0.413 m  18 mm    0.020 m   1 mm
   egm96-15     EGM96    15'      1.152 m  40 mm    0.169 m   7 mm
   egm96-5      EGM96     5'      0.140 m   5 mm    0.003 m   1 mm
   egm2008-5    EGM2008   5'      0.478 m  12 mm    0.294 m   5 mm
   egm2008-2_5  EGM2008   2.5'    0.135 m   3 mm    0.031 m   1 mm
   egm2008-1    EGM2008   1'      0.025 m   1 mm    0.003 m   1 mm

By default, the C<egm96-5> magnetic is used.  This may changed by setting
the environment variable C<MAGNETIC_NAME> or with the B<-n> option.  The
errors listed here are estimates of the quantization and interpolation
errors in the reported heights compared to the specified magnetic.  As a
result of the way that the magnetic data is stored, the calculation of
gradients can result in large quantization errors.  This is particularly
acute at high latitudes and for the easterly gradient.

The magnetic data will be loaded from a directory specified at compile
time.  This may changed by setting the environment variable
C<MAGNETIC_PATH> or with the B<-d> option.  The B<-h> option prints the
default magnetic path and name.  Use the B<-v> option to ascertain the full
path name of the data file.

Instructions for downloading and installing magnetic data are available at
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net/html/magnetic.html#magneticinst>.

B<NOTE>: all the magnetics above apply to the WGS84 ellipsoid (I<a> =
6378137 m, I<f> = 1/298.257223563) only.

=head1 INTERPOLATION

Cubic interpolation is used to compute the magnetic height unless B<-l> is
specified in which case bilinear interpolation is used.  The cubic
interpolation is based on a least-squares fit of a cubic polynomial to a
12-point stencil

   . 1 1 .
   1 2 2 1
   1 2 2 1
   . 1 1 .

The cubic is constrained to be independent of longitude when evaluating
the height at one of the poles.  Cubic interpolation is considerably
more accurate than bilinear; however it results in small discontinuities
in the returned height on cell boundaries.  The gradients are computed
by differentiating the interpolated results.  As a result of the way
that the magnetic data is stored, the calculation of gradients can result
in large quantization errors.  This is particularly acute for fine
grids, at high latitudes, and for the easterly gradient.

=head1 CACHE

By default, the data file is randomly read to compute the magnetic heights
at the input positions.  Usually this is sufficient for interactive use.
If many heights are to be computed, use B<-c> I<south> I<west> I<north>
I<east> to notify B<MagneticEval> to read a rectangle of data into memory;
heights within the this rectangle can then be computed without any disk
access.  If B<-a> is specified all the magnetic data is read; in the case
of C<egm2008-1>, this requires about 0.5 GB of RAM.  The evaluation of
heights outside the cached area causes the necessary data to be read
from disk.  Use the B<-v> option to verify the size of the cache.

Regardless of whether any cache is requested (with the B<-a> or B<-c>
options), the data for the last grid cell in cached.  This allows
the magnetic height along a continuous path to be returned with little
disk overhead.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<MAGNETIC_NAME>

Override the compile-time default magnetic name of C<egm96-5>.  The B<-h>
option reports the value of B<MAGNETIC_NAME>, if defined, otherwise it
reports the compile-time value.  If the B<-n> I<name> option is used,
then I<name> takes precedence.

=item B<MAGNETIC_PATH>

Override the compile-time default magnetic path.  This is typically
C</usr/local/share/GeographicLib/magnetics> on Unix-like systems and
C<C:/Documents and Settings/All Users/Application
Data/GeographicLib/magnetics> on Windows systems.  The B<-h> option reports
the value of B<MAGNETIC_PATH>, if defined, otherwise it reports the
compile-time value.  If the B<-d> I<dir> option is used, then I<dir>
takes precedence.

=back

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<MagneticEval> to return an exit code
of 1.  However, an error does not cause B<MagneticEval> to terminate;
following lines will be converted.

=head1 ABBREVIATIONS

The magnetic is usually approximated by an "earth gravity model". The
models published by the NGA are:

=over

=item B<EGM84>

An earth gravity model published by the NGA in 1984,
L<http://earth-info.nga.mil/GandG/wgs84/gravitymod/wgs84_180/wgs84_180.html>.

=item B<EGM96>

An earth gravity model published by the NGA in 1996,
L<http://earth-info.nga.mil/GandG/wgs84/gravitymod/egm96/egm96.html>.

=item B<EGM2008>

An earth gravity model published by the NGA in 2008,
L<http://earth-info.nga.mil/GandG/wgs84/gravitymod/egm2008>.

=item B<WGS84>

World Geodetic System 1984,
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WGS84>.

=item B<HAE>

Height above the WGS84 ellipsoid.

=item B<MSL>

Mean sea level, used as a convenient short hand for the magnetic.
(However, typically, the magnetic differs by a few meters from mean sea
level.)

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

The height of the EGM96 magnetic at Timbuktu

    echo "16d46'33N" "3d00'34W" | MagneticEval
    => 28.7068 -0.02e-6 -1.73e-6

The first number returned is the height of the magnetic and the 2nd and 3rd
are its slopes in the northerly and easterly directions.

Convert a point in UTM zone 18N from MSL to HAE

   echo 531595 4468135 23 | MagneticEval --msltohae -z 18N
   => 531595 4468135 -10.842

=head1 SEE ALSO

GeoConvert(1).

=head1 AUTHOR

B<MagneticEval> was written by Charles Karney.

=head1 HISTORY

B<MagneticEval> was added to GeographicLib, L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>,
in 2009-09.
