=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

MagneticField -- compute the earth's magnetic field

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<MagneticField> [ B<-n> I<name> ] [ B<-d> I<dir> ] [ B<-t> I<time> ]
[ B<-r> ] [ B<-T> I<tguard> ] [ B<-H> I<hguard> ] [ B<-p> I<prec> ]
[ B<-v> ] [ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]
[ B<--input-file> I<infile> | B<--input-string> I<instring> ]
[ B<--output-file> I<outfile> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<MagneticField> reads in times and positions on standard input and
prints out the magnetic field on standard output and, optionally, its
rate of change.

The input line is of the form I<time> I<lat> I<lon> I<h>. I<time> is a
date of the form 2012-07-03 or a fractional year such as 2012.5.  I<lat>
and I<lon> are the latitude and longitude expressed as decimal degrees
or degrees, minutes, and seconds; see by GeoConvert(1).  I<h> is the
height above the ellipsoid in meters.  I<time> can be given on the
commend line as the argument to the I<-t> options, in which case it
should not be included on the input lines.

The output consists of the values declination (the direction of the
horizontal component of the field measure clockwise from north),
inclination (the direction of the magnetic field measured down from the
horizontal), the horizontal field, the north component, the east
component, the vertical component (down is positive), and the total
field.  The declination and inclination are measured in degrees.  The
components of the magnetic fields are given in nanotesla (nT).  If the
B<-r> option is given a second line is printed giving the rates of
change of these quantities in degrees/yr and nT/yr.

The WGS84 ellipsoid is used, I<a> = 6378137 m, I<f> = 1/298.257223563.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-n>

use magnetic field model I<name> instead of the default C<wmm2010>.  See
L<MODELS|models>.

=item B<-d>

read magnetic data from I<dir> instead of the default.  See
L<MODELS|models>.

=item B<-t>

evaluate the field at I<time> instead of expecting the time on the input
lines.

=item B<-r>

toggle whether to report the rates of change of the field.

=item B<-T>

signal an error if I<time> lies I<tguard> years (default 50 yr) beyond
the range for the model.

=item B<-H>

signal an error if I<h> lies I<hguard> meters (default 500000 m) beyond
the range for the model.

=item B<-p>

set the precision to I<prec> (default 1).  Fields are printed with
precision with I<prec> decimal places; angles use I<prec> + 1 places.

=item B<-v>

print information about the magnetic on standard error before processing
the input.

=item B<--version>

print version and exit.

=item B<-h>

print usage, the default magnetic path and name, and exit.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation and exit.

=item B<--input-file>

read input from the file I<infile> instead of from standard input; a file
name of "-" stands for standard input.

=item B<--input-string>

read input from the string I<instring> instead of from standard input.
All the semicolons in I<instring> are converted to newlines before the
reading begins.

=item B<--output-file>

write output to the file I<outfile> instead of to standard output; a
file name of "-" stands for standard output.

=back

=head1 MODELS

B<MagneticField> computes the magnetic field

By default, the C<wmm2010> magnetic is used.  This may changed by setting
the environment variable C<MAGNETIC_NAME> or with the B<-n> option.

The magnetic data will be loaded from a directory specified at compile
time.  This may changed by setting the environment variable
C<MAGNETIC_PATH> or with the B<-d> option.  The B<-h> option prints the
default magnetic path and name.  Use the B<-v> option to ascertain the full
path name of the data file.

Instructions for downloading and installing magnetic data are available at
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net/html/magnetic.html#magneticinst>.


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<MAGNETIC_NAME>

Override the compile-time default magnetic name of C<wmm2010>.  The B<-h>
option reports the value of B<MAGNETIC_NAME>, if defined, otherwise it
reports the compile-time value.  If the B<-n> I<name> option is used,
then I<name> takes precedence.

=item B<MAGNETIC_PATH>

Override the compile-time default magnetic path.  This is typically
C</usr/local/share/GeographicLib/magnetics> on Unix-like systems and
C<C:/Documents and Settings/All Users/Application
Data/GeographicLib/magnetics> on Windows systems.  The B<-h> option reports
the value of B<MAGNETIC_PATH>, if defined, otherwise it reports the
compile-time value.  If the B<-d> I<dir> option is used, then I<dir>
takes precedence.

=back

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<MagneticField> to return an exit
code of 1.  However, an error does not cause B<MagneticField> to
terminate; following lines will be converted.  If I<time> or I<h> are
outside the recommended ranges for the model (but inside the ranges
increase by I<tguard> and I<hguard>), a warning is printed on standard
error and the field (which may be inaccurate) is returned in the normal
way.

=head1 ABBREVIATIONS

The magnetic field is usually approximated by expansion in terms of
spherical harmonics.

=over

=item B<WMM2010>


=item B<EMM2010>


=item B<IGRF11>


=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

The height of the EGM96 magnetic at Timbuktu

    echo "16d46'33N" "3d00'34W" | MagneticField
    => 28.7068 -0.02e-6 -1.73e-6

The first number returned is the height of the magnetic and the 2nd and 3rd
are its slopes in the northerly and easterly directions.

Convert a point in UTM zone 18N from MSL to HAE

   echo 531595 4468135 23 | MagneticField --msltohae -z 18N
   => 531595 4468135 -10.842

=head1 SEE ALSO

GeoConvert(1).

=head1 AUTHOR

B<MagneticField> was written by Charles Karney.

=head1 HISTORY

B<MagneticField> was added to GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>, in version 1.15.
