=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

EquidistantTest(1) -- perform projections based on geodesics

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<EquidistantTest> ( B<-z> | B<-c> | B<-g> ) I<lat0> I<lon0> [ B<-r> ]
[ B<-e> I<a> I<r> ] [ B<-h> | B<--help> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Perform projections based on geodesics.  Convert geodetic coordinates to
either azimuthal equidistant, Cassini-Soldner, or gnomonic coordinates.
The center of the projection (I<lat0>, I<lon0>) is specified by either the B<-c>
option (for Cassini-Soldner), the B<-z> option (for azimuthal equidistant),
or the B<-g> option (for gnomonic).  At least one of these options must be
given (the last one given is used).

Geodetic coordinates are provided on standard input as a set of lines
containing (blank separated) I<latitude> and I<longitude> (degrees or
degrees, minutes, seconds).  For each set of geodetic coordinates, the
corresponding projected coordinates I<x>, I<y> (meters) are printed on
standard output together with the azimuth I<azi> (degrees) and
reciprocal scale I<rk>.  For Cassini-Soldner, I<azi> is the bearing of
the easting direction and the scale in the easting direction is 1 and
the scale in the northing direction is 1/I<rk>.  For azimuthal
equidistant and gnomonic, I<azi> is the bearing of the radial direction
and the scale in the azimuthal direction is 1/I<rk>.  For azimuthal
equidistant and gnomonic, the scales in the radial direction are 1 and
1/I<rk>^2, respectively.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-z>

use the azimuthal equidistant projection centered at latitude = I<lat0>,
longitude = I<lon0>.

=item B<-c>

use the Cassini-Soldner projection centered at latitude = I<lat0>,
longitude = I<lon0>.

=item B<-g>

use the ellipsoidal gnomonic projection centered at latitude = I<lat0>,
longitude = I<lon0>.

=item B<-r>

perform the reverse projection.  I<x> and I<y> are given on standard
input and each line of standard output gives I<latitude>, I<longitude>,
I<azi>, and I<rk>.

=item B<-e>

specify the ellipsoid via I<a> I<r>; the equatorial radius is I<a> and
the reciprocal flattening is I<r>.  Setting I<r> = 0 results in a
sphere.  Specify I<r> E<lt> 0 for a prolate ellipsoid.  By default, the
WGS84 ellipsoid is used, I<a> = 6378137m, I<r> = 298.257223563.

=item B<-h>

print usage.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

   echo 48.648 -2.007 | EquidistantTest -c 48.836 2.337
   => -319919 -11791 86.7 0.999
   echo -319919 -11791 | EquidistantTest -c 48.836 2.337 -r
   => 48.648 -2.007 86.7 0.999

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<EquidistantTest> is a part of GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.  The ellipsoidal gnomonic projection is
derived in Section 13 of C. F. F. Karney, I<Geodesics on an ellipsoid of
revolution>, Feb. 2011; preprint L<http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1215>.
