=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

GeoConvert(1) -- convert geographic coordinates

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<GeoConvert> [ B<-g> | B<-d> | B<-u> | B<-m> | B<-c> ] [ B<-p> I<prec> ]
[ B<-z> I<zone> | B<-s> | B<-t> ] [ B<-n> ] [ B<-h> | B<--help> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<GeoConvert> reads from standard input interpreting each line as a
geographic coordinate and prints the coordinate in the format specified
by the options on standard output.  The input is interpreted in one of
three different ways depending on how many space or comma delimited
tokens there are on the line.  The options B<-g>, B<-d>, B<-u>, and B<-m>
govern the format of output.  In all cases, the WGS84 model of the earth
is used (I<a> = 6378137m, I<f> = 1/298.257223563).

=over

=item B<geographic>

2 tokens (output options B<-g> or B<-d>) given as I<latitude>
I<longitude> using decimal degrees or degrees minutes seconds.  d, ',
and " are used to denote degrees, minutes, and seconds, with the least
significant designator optional.  Latitude is given first; however, on
input, either may be given first by appending or prepending I<N> or I<S>
to the latitude and I<E> or I<W> to the longitude.  For example, the
following are all equivalent

    33.3 44.4
    E44.4 N33.3
    33d18'N 44d24'E
    44d24 33d18N

=item B<UTM/UPS>

3 tokens (output option B<-u>) given as I<zone>+I<hemisphere> I<easting>
I<northing> or I<easting> I<northing> I<zone>+I<hemisphere>, where
I<hemisphere> is either I<N> or I<S>.  The I<zone> is absent for a UPS
specification.  For example,

    38N 444140.54 3684706.36
    444140.54 3684706.36 38N
    S 2173854.98 2985980.58
    2173854.98 2985980.58 S

=item B<MRGS>

1 token (output option B<-m>) is used to specify the center of an MGRS
grid square.  For example,

    38SMB4484
    38SMB44140847064

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-g>

output latitude and longitude (decimal degrees).  Default output mode.

=item B<-d>

output latitude and longitude (DMS, degrees minutes seconds).

=item B<-u>

output UTM or UPS.

=item B<-m>

output MGRS.

=item B<-c>

output meridian convergence and scale for the corresponding UTM or
UPS projection.  Convergence is the bearing of grid north given as
degrees clockwise from true north.

=item B<-p>

set the precision to I<prec> (default 0); I<prec> is the precision
relative to 1m.  See L<PRECISION|precision>.

=item B<-z>

set the zone to I<zone> for output.  Use either 0 E<lt> I<zone> E<lt>= 60
for a UTM zone or I<zone> = 0 for UPS.  Alternatively use a
I<zone>+I<hemisphere> designation (I<hemisphere> is ignored), e.g., 38N.
See L<ZONE|zone>.

=item B<-s>

use the standard UPS and UTM zones.

=item B<-t>

similar to B<-s> but forces UPS regions to the closest UTM zone.

=item B<-n>

on input, MGRS coordinates refer to the south-west corner of the MGRS
square instead of the center; see L<MGRS|mgrs>.

=item B<-h>

print usage.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation.

=back

=head1 PRECISION

I<prec> gives precision of the output with I<prec> = 0 giving 1m
precision, I<prec> = 3 giving 1mm precision, etc.  I<prec> is the number
of digits after the decimal point for UTM/UPS.  The number of digits per
coordinate for MGRS is 5 + I<prec>.  For decimal degrees, the number of
digits after the decimal point is 5 + I<prec>.  For DMS (degree, minute,
seconds) output, the number of digits after the decimal point in the
seconds components is 1 + I<prec>; if this is negative then use minutes
(I<prec> = -2 or -3) or degrees (I<prec> E<lt>= -4) as the least significant
component.  Print convergence, resp. scale, with 5 + I<prec>, resp. 7 +
I<prec>, digits after the decimal point.  The minimum value of I<prec> is
-5 and the maximum is 9 for UTM/UPS, 9 for decimal degrees, 10 for DMS,
6 for MGRS, and 8 for convergence and scale.

=head1 MGRS

MGRS coordinates represent a square patch of the earth, thus C<38SMB4488>
is in zone C<38N> with 444km E<lt>= I<easting> E<lt> 445km and 3688km E<lt>=
I<northing> E<lt> 3689km.  Consistent with this representation,
coordinates are I<truncated> (instead of I<rounded>) to the requested
precision.  Similiarly, on input an MGRS coordinate represents the
I<center> of the square (C<38N 444500 3688500> in the example above).
However, if the B<-n> option is given then the south-west corner of the
square is returned instead (C<38N 444000 3688000> in the example above).

=head1 ZONE

If the input is B<geographic>, B<GeoConvert> uses the standard rules of
selecting UTM vs UPS and for assigning the UTM zone (with the Norway and
Svalbard exceptions).  If the input is B<UTM/UPS>, or B<MGRS>, then the
choice beteen UTM and UPS and the UTM zone mirrors the input.  The B<-z>
I<zone>, B<-s>, B<-t> options allow these rules to be overridden with
I<zone> = 0 being used to indicate UPS.  For example, the point

   79.9S 6.1E

corresponds to possible MGRS coordinates

   32CMS4324728161 (standard UTM zone = 32)
   31CEM6066227959 (neighboring UTM zone = 31)
     BBZ1945517770 (neighboring UPS zone)

then

   echo 79.9S 6.1E      | GeoConvert -p -3 -m       => 32CMS4328
   echo 31CEM6066227959 | GeoConvert -p -3 -m       => 31CEM6027
   echo 31CEM6066227959 | GeoConvert -p -3 -m -s    => 32CMS4328
   echo 31CEM6066227959 | GeoConvert -p -3 -m -z 0  =>   BBZ1917

B<NOTE>: the letter in the zone specification for UTM is a hemisphere
designator I<N> or I<S> and I<not> an MGRS latitude band letter.
Convert the MGRS latitude band letter to a hemisphere as follows:
replace I<C> thru I<M> by I<S>; replace I<N> thru I<X> by I<N>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

   echo 38SMB4488 | GeoConvert         => 33.33424 44.40363
   echo 38SMB4488 | GeoConvert -d -p 1 => 33d20'03.25"N 044d24'13.06"E
   echo 38SMB4488 | GeoConvert -u      => 38N 444500 3688500
   echo E44d24 N33d20 | GeoConvert -m -p -3 => 38SMB4488

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<GeoConvert> to return an exit code
of 1.  However, an error does not cause B<GeoConvert> to terminate;
following lines will be converted.

=head1 ABBREVIATIONS

=over

=item B<UTM>

Universal Transverse Mercator,
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Transverse_Mercator_coordinate_system>.

=item B<UPS>

Univeral Polar Stereographic,
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Polar_Stereographic>.

=item B<MGRS>

Military Grid Reference System,
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_grid_reference_system>.

=item B<WGS84>

World Geodetic System 1984,
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WGS84>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<GeoConvert> is a part of GeographicLib, L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.
