=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

Planimeter(1) -- compute the area of geodesic polygons

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<Planimeter> [ B<-s> ] [ B<-r> ] [ B<-e> I<a> I<r> ]
[ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Measure the area of a geodesic polygon.  Reads polygon vertices from
standard input, one per line.  Vertices may be given as latitude and
longitude, UTM/UPS, or MGRS coordinates, interpreted in the same way as
GeoConvert(1).  (MGRS coordinates signify the center of the corresponing
MGRS square.)  The end of input, a blank line, or a line which can't be
interpreted as a vertex signals the end of one polygon and the start of
the next.  For each polygon print a summary line with the number of
points, the perimeter (in meters), and the area (in meters^2).

By default, areas are traversed in a counter-clockwise sense (in other
words, the included area is to the left of the perimeter) and a positive
area is returned.  By this rule, a polygon tranversed in a clockwise
sense will return the area of ellipsoid excluded by the polygon;
however, if the B<-s> option is given, the signed area will be returned.
If the B<-r> option is given, the included area is to the right of the
perimeter.  Only simple polygons are supported for the area computation.
Polygons may include one or both poles.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-s>

return a signed result for the area.  (This is a toggle; repeating the
option undoes this setting.)

=item B<-r>

reverse the traversal rule so that clockwise traversal yields a positive
result.  (This is a toggle; repeating the option undoes this setting.)

=item B<-e>

specify the ellipsoid via I<a> I<r>; the equatorial radius is I<a> and
the reciprocal flattening is I<r>.  Setting I<r> = 0 results in a
sphere.  Specify I<r> E<lt> 0 for a prolate ellipsoid.  By default, the
WGS84 ellipsoid is used, I<a> = 6378137m, I<r> = 298.257223563.

=item B<--version>

print version.

=item B<-h>

print usage.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Example (the area of the 100km MGRS square 18SWK)

   Planimeter <<EOF
   18N 500000 4400000
   18N 600000 4400000
   18N 600000 4500000
   18N 500000 4500000
   EOF
   => 4 400139.53295860 10007388597.1913

The following code takes the output from gdalinfo and reports the area
covered by the data (assuming the edges of the image are geodesics).

   #! /bin/sh
   egrep '^((Upper|Lower) (Left|Right)|Center) ' |
   sed -e 's/d /d/g' -e "s/' /'/g" | tr -s '(),\r\t' ' ' | awk '{
       if ($1 $2 == "UpperLeft")
	   ul = $6 " "  $5;
       else if ($1 $2 == "LowerLeft")
	   ll = $6 " "  $5;
       else if ($1 $2 == "UpperRight")
	   ur = $6 " "  $5;
       else if ($1 $2 == "LowerRight")
	   lr = $6 " "  $5;
       else if ($1 == "Center") {
	   printf "%s\n%s\n%s\n%s\n\n", ul, ll, lr, ur;
	   ul = ll = ur = lr = "";
       }
   }
   ' | Planimeter | cut -f3 -d' '

=head1 SEE ALSO

GeoConvert(1).  B<Planimeter> is a part of GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.  The algorithm for the area of geodesic
polygon is given in Section 15 of C. F. F. Karney, I<Geodesics on an
ellipsoid of revolution>, Feb. 2011; preprint
L<http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1215>.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<Planimeter> was written by Charles Karney.
