=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

CartConvert(1) -- convert geodetic coordinates to geocentric or local cartesian

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<CartConvert> [ B<-r> ] [ B<-l> I<lat0> I<lon0> I<h0> ] [ B<-e> I<a> I<r> ]
[ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Convert geodetic coordinates to either geocentric or local cartesian
coordinates.  Geocentric coordinates have the origin at the center of the
earth, with the z axis going thru the north pole, and the x axis thru lat =
0, lon = 0.  By default, the conversion is to geocentric coordinates.
Specifying B<-l> I<lat0> I<lon0> I<h0> causes a local coordinate system to be used with
the origin at latitude = lat0, longitude = lon0, height = h0, z normal to
the ellipsoid and y due north.

Geodetic coordinates are provided on standard input as a set of lines
containing (blank separated) latitude, longitude (degrees or DMS), and
height (meters).  For each set of geodetic coordinates, the corresponding
cartesian coordinates x, y, z (meters) are printed on standard output.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-r>

perform the reverse projection.

=item B<-e>

specify the ellipsoid via I<a> I<r>; the equatorial radius is I<a> and
the reciprocal flattening is I<r>.  Setting I<r> = 0 results in a
sphere.  Specify I<r> E<lt> 0 for a prolate ellipsoid.  By default, the
WGS84 ellipsoid is used, I<a> = 6378137m, I<r> = 298.257223563.

=item B<--version>

print version.

=item B<-h>

print usage.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

   echo 33.3 44.4 6000 | CartConvert
   => 3816209.60 3737108.55 3485109.57
   echo 33.3 44.4 6000 | CartConvert -l 33 44 20
   => 37288.97 33374.29 5783.64
   echo 30000 30000 0 | CartConvert -r
   => 6.483 45 -6335709.73

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<CartConvert> is a part of GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.
