=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

EquidistantTest(1) -- perform projections based on geodesics

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Usage: EquidistantTest -(c|z|g) lat0 lon0 [-r] [-e a r] [-h]

$Id$

Perform projections based on geodesics.  Convert geodetic coordinates to
either azimuthal equidistant, Cassini-Soldner, or gnomonic coordinates.
The center of the projection (lat0, lon0) is specified by either the -c
option (for Cassini-Soldner), the -z option (for azimuthal equidistant),
or the -g option (for gnomonic).  At least one of these options must be
given (the last one given is used).

By default, the WGS84 ellipsoid is used.  Specifying "-e a r" sets the
equatorial radius of the ellipsoid to "a" and the reciprocal flattening
to r.  Setting r = 0 results in a sphere.  Specify r < 0 for a prolate
ellipsoid.

Geodetic coordinates are provided on standard input as a set of lines
containing (blank separated) latitude and longitude (degrees or DMS).
For each set of geodetic coordinates, the corresponding projected
coordinates x, y (meters) are printed on standard output together with
the azimuth azi (degrees) and reciprocal scale rk.  For Cassini-Soldner,
azi is the bearing of the easting direction and the scale in the easting
direction is 1 and the scale in the northing direction is 1/rk.  For
azimuthal equidistant and gnomonic, azi is the bearing of the radial
direction and the scale in the azimuthal direction is 1/rk.  For
azimuthal equidistant and gnomonic, the scales in the radial direction
are 1 and 1/rk^2, respectively.

If -r is given the reverse transformation is performed.  x and y are
given on standard input and each line of the standard output gives
latitude, longitude, azi, and rk.

-h prints this help.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<EquidistantTest> is a part of GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.
