=for comment $Id$

=head1 NAME

TransverseMercatorTest(1) -- convert between geographic and transverse Mercator

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<TransverseMercatorTest> [ B<-r> ] [ B<-s> | B<-t> ]
[ B<--version> | B<-h> | B<--help> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Convert between geographic coordinates and transverse Mercator
coordinates.

Read lines with I<latitude> and I<longitude> (or I<easting> and
I<northing> if B<-r> is specified) from standard input and print
I<latitude>, I<longitude>, I<easting>, I<northing>, I<convergence>, and
I<scale>.  Units are decimal degrees (or degrees, minutes, seconds) and
meters.

By default, the WGS84 is ellipsoid is used (I<a> = 6378137m, I<f> =
1/298.257223563), with central meridian = 0, UTM central scale (0.9996),
and false easting and false northing = 0.  This is affected by the B<-t>
option.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-r>

perform the reverse projection; (the inputs are I<easting> and
I<northing>).

=item B<-s>

use the sixth-order Krueger series approximation to the transverse
Mercator projection instead of the exact projection.

=item B<-t>

use an ellipsoid of eccentricity 0.1, central scale = 1, 1/4 meridian =
1.  In addition, the cut in the exact transverse Mercator projection at
I<northing> = 0 is removed.  The domain of latitude (I<lat>) and
longitude (I<lon>) is the union of

    lat in [0, 90]  and lon in [0, 90]
    lat in (-90, 0] and lon in [81, 90]

The domain of easting (I<x>) and northing (I<y>) is the union of

    x in [0, inf)       and y in [0, 1]
    x in [1.71..., inf) and y in (-inf, 0]

=item B<--version>

print version.

=item B<-h>

print usage.

=item B<--help>

print full documentation.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

   echo 0 90 | TransverseMercatorTest
   => 0 90 25953592.84 9997964.94 90 18.40
   echo 260e5 100e5 | TransverseMercatorTest -r
   => -0.02 90.00 26000000 10000000 90.01 18.47

=head1 ERRORS

An illegal line of input will print an error message to standard output
beginning with C<ERROR:> and causes B<TransverseMercatorTest> to return
an exit code of 1.  However, an error does not cause
B<TransverseMercatorTest> to terminate; following lines will be
converted.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<TransverseMercatorTest> is a part of GeographicLib,
L<http://geographiclib.sf.net>.  The algorithms for the transverse
Mercator projection are described in C. F. F. Karney, I<Transverse
Mercator with an accuracy of a few nanometers>, J. Geod (2011); DOI
L<http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00190-011-0445-3>; preprint
L<http://arxiv.org/abs/1002.1417>.  The explanation of the domain of the
projection with the B<-t> option is given in Section 5 of this paper.

=head1 AUTHOR

B<TransverseMercatorTest> was written by Charles Karney.
